{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2706
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;\red13\green12\blue26;\red193\green193\blue193;
\red18\green139\blue2;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c5882\c5882\c13725;\cssrgb\c80000\c80000\c80000;
\cssrgb\c0\c60000\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs37\fsmilli18667 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 --- Day 9: Rope Bridge ---\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \strokec4 This rope bridge creaks as you walk along it. You aren't sure how old it is, or whether it can even support your weight.\cb1 \
\cb3 It seems to support the Elves just fine, though. The bridge spans a gorge which was carved out by the massive river far below you.\cb1 \
\cb3 You step carefully; as you do, the ropes stretch and twist. You decide to distract yourself by modeling rope physics; maybe you can even figure out where\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 not\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0to step.\cb1 \
\cb3 Consider a rope with a knot at each end; these knots mark the\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 head\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0and the\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 tail\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0of the rope. If the head moves far enough away from the tail, the tail is pulled toward the head.\cb1 \
\cb3 Due to nebulous reasoning involving\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_units#Planck_length"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \cb3 \strokec5 Planck lengths}}, you should be able to model the positions of the knots on a two-dimensional grid. Then, by following a hypothetical\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 series of motions\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0(your puzzle input) for the head, you can determine how the tail will move.\cb1 \
\cb3 Due to the aforementioned Planck lengths, the rope must be quite short; in fact, the head (H) and tail (T) must\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 always be touching\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0(diagonally adjacent and even overlapping both count as touching):\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 ....\
.TH.\
....\
\
....\
.H..\
..T.\
....\
\
...\
.H. (H covers T)\
...\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 If the head is ever two steps directly up, down, left, or right from the tail, the tail must also move one step in that direction so it remains close enough:\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 .....    .....    .....\
.TH.. -> .T.H. -> ..TH.\
.....    .....    .....\
\
...    ...    ...\
.T.    .T.    ...\
.H. -> ... -> .T.\
...    .H.    .H.\
...    ...    ...\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Otherwise, if the head and tail aren't touching and aren't in the same row or column, the tail always moves one step diagonally to keep up:\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 .....    .....    .....\
.....    ..H..    ..H..\
..H.. -> ..... -> ..T..\
.T...    .T...    .....\
.....    .....    .....\
\
.....    .....    .....\
.....    .....    .....\
..H.. -> ...H. -> ..TH.\
.T...    .T...    .....\
.....    .....    .....\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 You just need to work out where the tail goes as the head follows a series of motions. Assume the head and the tail both start at the same position, overlapping.\cb1 \
\cb3 For example:\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 R 4\
U 4\
L 3\
D 1\
R 4\
D 1\
L 5\
R 2\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 This series of motions moves the head\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 right\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0four steps, then\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 up\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0four steps, then\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 left\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0three steps, then\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 down\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0one step, and so on. After each step, you'll need to update the position of the tail if the step means the head is no longer adjacent to the tail. Visually, these motions occur as follows (s\'a0marks the starting position as a reference point):\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 == Initial State ==\
\
......\
......\
......\
......\
H.....  (H covers T, s)\
\
== R 4 ==\
\
......\
......\
......\
......\
TH....  (T covers s)\
\
......\
......\
......\
......\
sTH...\
\
......\
......\
......\
......\
s.TH..\
\
......\
......\
......\
......\
s..TH.\
\
== U 4 ==\
\
......\
......\
......\
....H.\
s..T..\
\
......\
......\
....H.\
....T.\
s.....\
\
......\
....H.\
....T.\
......\
s.....\
\
....H.\
....T.\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
== L 3 ==\
\
...H..\
....T.\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
..HT..\
......\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
.HT...\
......\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
== D 1 ==\
\
..T...\
.H....\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
== R 4 ==\
\
..T...\
..H...\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
..T...\
...H..\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
...TH.\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
....TH\
......\
......\
s.....\
\
== D 1 ==\
\
......\
....T.\
.....H\
......\
s.....\
\
== L 5 ==\
\
......\
....T.\
....H.\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
....T.\
...H..\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
......\
..HT..\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
......\
.HT...\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
......\
HT....\
......\
s.....\
\
== R 2 ==\
\
......\
......\
.H....  (H covers T)\
......\
s.....\
\
......\
......\
.TH...\
......\
s.....\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 After simulating the rope, you can count up all of the positions the\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 tail visited at least once\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 . In this diagram,\'a0s\'a0again marks the starting position (which the tail also visited) and\'a0#\'a0marks other positions the tail visited:\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 ..##..\
...##.\
.####.\
....#.\
s###..\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa373\partightenfactor0
\cf4 So, there are\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 13\cf4 \strokec4 \shad0 \'a0positions the tail visited at least once.\cb1 \
\cb3 Simulate your complete hypothetical series of motions.\'a0\cf2 \strokec2 \shad\shadx0\shady0\shadr100\shado255 \shadc0 How many positions does the tail of the rope visit at least once?\cf4 \cb1 \strokec4 \shad0 \
}